+++
categories = ["rant"]
tags = ["expat", "france"]
date = "2022-11-22T15:15:00+01:00"
title = "Les Parisiens"
type = "draft"
image = ""
toc = false
author = "Karan"
+++

> Stop Cribbing!

That's what she said. Literally. Parul also handed me some links to promising startups.

It had been a year into our "settled" life in Bangalore. We had ended our travels in late 2019, and moved to Bangalore in the beginning of the next year with the few material possession we still retained in our name. I spent weeks meeting folks from various startups and looking for a promising gig. Parul already had a job after a week or so into her hunt. I eventually decided to join Google as impulsively as is wont of me. COVID locked down the world, we moved into a beautiful apartment in APR with friends for company. We were still travelling enough, though with extreme caution. Everything was rosy!

My job was not what I had in mind though. After the break I was raring to go; pick up difficult problems, solve them, execute them, burn all the creative energy I had managed to replenish in the last couple of years. And my job at Google allowed everything but that. Google is an extremely good employer, but the red-tape is spun like a web. It was definitely not what I had in mind for myself at the moment. Since Parul and I were sharing an office at home, she used to hear me complain endlessly. And then she got tired and told me to start looking for another job.

And that's how we ended up in Paris.

It was a tad bit uncomfortable in the beginning. Neither of us are used to being expats (which is very different from being travellers) and the French surely do not make things easy. To top that, the relocation service was probably the worst possible. The apartment we were supposed to stay in was not confirmed till we were actually on board our flight to Paris!

But despite all the chaos, and occasional doubts, our spirit of adventure persevered. The novelty of the situation and the beauty of Paris made the pill easier to swallow. We had swapped out 150 sq. mtr. apartment for a 30 sq. mtr. one at the steps of Montmarte, next to the infamous Pigalle. Walking in the beautifully lit up streets at night and trying the pastries (-) became a regular addiction. I used to spend my days in the office while Parul worked on her job hunt. Weekends were spent exploring the city together and dining out to try the cuisine.

A couple of months into it all, we were bothered by our first problem: the visa situation. Parul had to leave for India to attend a wedding and the date on our visa was ticking down.

We had moved to France on a long term visa (three months) that stated we needed to apply for a titre de sejour (-) upon our arrival. Since we were still not used to how things were supposed to be, we never followed up on this application. A good twenty days in, we were mailed by the relocation service about the beginning of the process and asked for documents. Why they had to wait so long is beyond me but now we have come to accept this as a French way of doing things :shrugging: The timelines stated extended well beyond our visa expiry and after a few more days, we came to know that Parul's titre (-) would be applied only after mine was approved :expressionless: To top it all, no one seemed to be sure how the process worked and what would happen if we did not get the titre (-) in time of the visa expiry. Seemed like the French government was partially to blame with their obscure and changing requirements. I made a big deal out of this because as travellers, overstaying a visa is probably one of the things you are extremely wary of, specially if you hold a weak passport.

Long story short, we were told that the delays are extremely normal and that the authorities are aware of it. One should not leave the Schengen area while the visa has expired and the titre (-) is still not approved. No one goes around checking your visa usually and we have faced no problems because of the gap at immigration, so I can confirm this is quite normal even though it feels like it isn't :sweat-smile: Another thing that we learnt later was that one is obliged to get the titre (-) fixed whenever they change address. Like all other rules regarding the titre (-) this seems to be rather flexible and no one blocks you from anything if it's not done. It's just "advisable" to do it, specially if you are changing your _department_.

With the titre (-) situation sorted, the next thing on our agenda was getting an apartment. This was an amusing task as well :joy: The relocation service was, as usual, no help. They suggested we go with a serviced apartment when we had our stuff on the way from India. We are partially glad they managed to delay the delivery of our stuff as well because it would have been impossible to keep in the small apartment. Anyhow, I got recommendations from my colleagues and used the app Jinka (-) for the hunt; found ones that we liked and fit the budget; left messages for a visit and got appointments with a few. The ones we saw were mostly outside Paris, either on the edge or in one of the districts just outside. We liked one of these and moved in late December. Sometime during a conversation with a colleague I mentioned how we had not managed to get a viewing of a single apartment inside Paris and he laughed at us leaving messages to the property listings.
"In Paris, you need to call the person within 5 minutes of the listing. Else their voicemail is already full."
:rolling-eyes: So that was the trick. Lesson for the next time.

We had started taking lessons in French since May 2021, when I had joined Voodoo. This was ongoing but once a week was too little to learn the language well. I supplemented it with Duolingo and almost a year and a half later, I am able to understand basic French in most situations and speak a bit of it in broken grammar much to the amusement and horror of native speakers :joy: While it is not required in Paris and you can get by with English in most of the situations, I believe that knowing the language enables you to understand the culture better. Plus, in quaint French villages off the tourist grid, it would be more of a necessity. The French get a bit of a bad rep for being arrogant and uptight about their language but honestly, we have found them to be extremely genial (-). They really have no need to learn and speak in English but we from the English speaking world tend to conveniently forget it. Having a bit of courtesy usually helps us in most situations. Instead of assuming that the person in front of you would speak English, we start with a polite "Parlez vous Anglais?" Most of the times the person denies it, saying "Only a little" and we end up having a perfectly good conversation with them in English. Or if they deny it completely and we started speaking bad French, they would start speaking bad English. They'd rather murder the English language than let us murder the French :joy:

Figuring out transportation was easy for us. We have been public transport people since always and that is probably the best way to move around in Paris. The metro / bus / train connectivity is great. Whether you are a tourist or a denizen, there are multiple options available to choose from (link to sncf). While it might seem expensive, it ends up saving you time and money as compared to any other means of transport in most cases. The only thing to be vary about is that there are frequent closures or delays because of strikes or missed baggage. The app (Bonjour RATP) can help you plan your commute better.

Talking about strikes, it is, as my colleagues call it, one of the favourite national sports in France :joy: It was amusing to witness at first. Every weekend, we could see a procession going around in some part of the town or crowds gathered in front of the city hall protesting for or against something. The germanderie (-) defined a  perimeter and made sure that the protest followed the defined protocol. As an Indian, it seemed like an extremely weird setup. We are used to protests being violent or agitated with the role of the police being repressive. Later I was to find out that some companies here give days off to attend protests for issues that one cares about! This was a different world indeed.

Probably the process that took the longest for us was getting our CPAM account and the carte vitale (-). This is the French social security and the health card. Our relocation advisor started the process via mails (snail mail, not emails) in January 2022. She wanted to wait for us to get an apartment first for some unfathomable reason. Anyway, once it started, we had multiple correspondences with an average delay of a month each way. They kept asking for documents which we had already sent but which did not qualify their criteria. Eventually, in August 2022, the wiser me ditched the relocation middle person and started mailing CPAM myself. I sent the documents required once again and then things moved much faster. In November, after an extended lack of communication, I called their English speaking helpline to learn that our documents had been processed and we could now order a carte vitale (-). I was too excited with this to ask them how and when they were planning to communicate this if I had not called them :expressionless: Also, I learnt that there is a much faster way to do this thing. Just walk in at the CPAM office in your _department_ and hand them the documents. This way you do not lose months if they find something missing :rolling-eyes:

Tax filing is probably another concern that might come up. The taxes in France are to be filed for the calendar year. The process is simple enough if you have a tax number (TIN?). If this is your first tax filing, it needs to be done in person and might take a bit more time but it is in no way complicated. I think the process just lacks online resources which makes it difficult to understand. The taxes are filed per individual for the entire household. So Parul's TIN (?) was generated with my filing even though she had nothing to file for. You need to get the forms (xxxx) and fill them up correctly. Then walk to your department's Public Finances (-) office before the end date and hand over the documents. The office usually entertains walk-ins everyday but on certain days the appointments are given preference. A few months later, your mailbox will contain an acknowledgement and your TIN (?). Voila (-)! Simple as that.
